I am Carl Shepard, professional bass instructor
and here I am going to explain some reasons
behind different techniques. Slapping is something
that is kind of percussive and when you do
that in addition to having a drummer with
you, you can add to a percussive field, lot
of disco songs use slapping. There are different
funk bands that use it and really when you
switch from just using your fingers to using
your thumb, it gives you more of a presence
and more of a treble gain to the notes. There
are things you can do with you fingers that
you can’t do with your thumb however and
a lot of that comes with grooving with your
drummer and being able to find places where
you can mute and use the mute technique to
really start to add to what the drummer is
doing. The slap and plucking sound can be
mimicked as a bass hit and a snare hit, so
when your drummer is using the bass the kick
drum, you know you want to slap on that and
then pluck where the snare is coming in, a
lot other things you can do with picking come
with mute.
You can get a sound in there that almost mimics
the bass drum, so in between notes you can
use a little bit of mute to get more of a
groove and help the drummer out and he’ll
be feeling you better too.